README.md, before:

# espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor
Home Assistant / ESPHome Integration for the Seeed Studio 60GHz mmWave Breathing and Heartbeat Module

![ESPHome HA Integration](/static/images/HA%20Sensor.png)

![ESP Capive Portal](/static/images/ESP%20Captive%20Portal.png)

Some project notes and data on development testing can be found [here](/static/project.md)!

My first attempts to make one of these Seeed 60GHz mmWave radar sensors work in Home Assistant was using MQTT which you can find some examples in my other repos here but the ultimate goal was always to fully enable an ESPHome integration which I've learned is simply more stable on its own, and also more resilient with respect to HA restarts or even power flickers or WiFi issues. The way the HA/ESPHome host taps into the ESP MCU using the API method simply works and you're able to rely on the mature underlying code which is installed onto the MCU when you start out using ESPHome as the base to build your sensors. Using MQTT on Arduino was fun and I learned a lot but this is quite a bit more reliable as a smart home integration with Home Assistant.

# Sensors explained...

Not all the sensors require an introduction, presence, motion, heartrate... all seem pretty self explanatory but there are some caveats on how I chose to implement them in ESPHome and C++

   * Activity Level is a 0-100 scale representation of just how much movement the sensor is detecting, don't kill the messenger, I have no idea how the sensor determines this
   * Angles X, Y, and sometimes Z?... yeah, I don't know how to read these, again-I'm just reporting the data to these states. You can find various notes and documentation hints on the Seeed Wiki and in their forums. The, so called, "upper computer" software also may hint how to read this data. Note: X and Y seem to update, Z is always zero. So really, never Z lol.
   * Distance does seem to work ok, the raw data from the sensor module is in CM so I'm using a multiplier to show it as 1 decimal Meters
   * Heartrate Level seems to work fine; I have not tested its effective range or used any other instrument to judge it's accuracy
   * Heartrate State is a no go. It is in the documented protocol tables and I've asked some Seeed support questions about it but haven't received much of a definitive answer. There is, however, a note in the protocol tables about how "the default is to not... at this time" which I suppose means it's not implemented yet.
   * Motion is an interesting one; I'm using it as a binary sensor, simply there is or is not motion. However, technically there are 3 states for this (none, stationary, and active) and I'm ignoring none because I can't think of why it’s even there given there is a separate dedicated presence function. Therefore, I'm mapping active and stationary to 1, and 0 respectively.
   * Presence is just a perfect binary status byte 1 or 0, present, not present.
   * Respiratory Rate works "as well as" heartrate level, again, I've no way to judge accuracy, I'm just updating the state with the raw data
   * Respiratory State... possibly the most interesting of them all, it starts out as detecting, then could be one of 3 more states: normal, too low, too high. I find this one quite entertaining... and that's probably the only thing you should use it for, entertainment purposes only! lol. I would instead recommend that you just use the actual Resp Rate data and devise your own thresholds that trigger alerts perhaps.  

# Sensor implementation

You can see from the ESP captive portal image above that some of the sensors have "internal" template references that look like duplicates. These will only show up in the code or on the debug webtool for the ESP module. I used the publish to template method to be able to have binary and text sensors using state data received to basic sensors from a single UART device component class.

The presence sensor for example:
  ```
  - id: presence_sensor
    name: "internal_presense_sensor_to_binary_template"
    internal: true
    on_value:
      - binary_sensor.template.publish:
          id: presence_template
          state: !lambda return x > 0;
  ```
Has a corresponding binary_sensor reference:

  ```
  - platform: template
    id: presence_template
    name: "${room} Presence"
    device_class: occupancy
    filters:
      - delayed_off: 5s
  ```

The presence sensor is marked as internal: true and given a name to hint at this while the presence binary_sensor is the one that is presented to the integration and has the occupancy device class and proper states

There are likely other ways to get around the issues I was facing but I found this to be clean and easy enough and kept the include.h uart device component code nice and simple.


# Installation:
 * Download the C++ header file and copy it (keeping the subfolder paths) into your Home Assistant config/esphome main folder:

   ```
   header/esp-mmwave-60ghz-sensor.h
   
   ```
 
 * In Home Assistant add-on, click ESPHome>open web gui and create a new device choosing the "continue" option and give it a name such as:

   ```
   espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor
   
   ```

* Click next and chose the type of ESP module you used in your build, this isn't a critical thing to have match but as long as it's some kind of ESP32 you can just select that for now and click next.
* You'll see a new card appear in the background for your ESP device, this is just an empty shell with only basic initialization code so far... click skip because you don't want to install this basic code to the ESP quite yet.
* Now click edit on your new sensor in ESPHome and you'll see the basic code:
   ```
   esphome:
    name: espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor

   esp32:
    board: esp32dev
    framework:
      type: arduino

   # Enable logging
   logger:

   # Enable Home Assistant API
   api:
     encryption:
       key: "cEEo6Dse5jSfuJ2FznX+3n7A6+6ZmzVNe92axpm2t04="

   ota:
     password: "488d6a3de442afaddb0250cffce64711"

   wifi:
    ssid: !secret wifi_ssid
    password: !secret wifi_password

     # Enable fallback hotspot (captive portal) in case wifi connection fails
    ap:
      ssid: "espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor"
     password: "RvZXGuhrPCzl"

   captive_portal:
   ```

* The easiest way to proceed is to copy all the code above out to notepad++ or your favorite editor and then paste back in the entire code from:
   ```
   esphome.yaml
   ```
* Now just edit some key lines in your new config:

   ```
    substitutions:
      # change device name to match your desired name
      device_name: "espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor"
      # change sensor name below to the one you want to see in Home Assistant
      device_name_pretty: ESP mmWave 60 gHz Test
      # change room name below to the one you want to see in Home Assistant
      room: ""
      # change the below to be your WiFi SSID
      ssid: !secret wifi_ssid
      # change the below to be your WiFi password
      wifi_password: !secret wifi_password
      # UART TX Pin
      uart_tx_pin: GPIO17
      # UART RX Pin
      uart_rx_pin: GPIO16
      # Distance sensor multiplier to express meters instead of centimeters
      distance_multiplier: ".01"
      
   ```
* The room: "name" is key as it will be the name of each sensor object in HA so if you chose "Office" here, you sensors will be Office Motion, Office Presence, etc...

* You'll also want to copy the generated api encryption key and ota password into this section of the full code:

   ```
   # Enable Home Assistant API
   api:
      encryption:
         key: "assigned_when_you_add_to_esphome"

   ota:
      password: "assigned_when_you_add_to_esphome"
   ```

* Lastly, in the wifi: section, there is a line that says "use_address: XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX" this is an optional element to workaround typical issues with mDNS and wifi/subnets. Basically, if you find your device is always showing as offline in ESPHome or has any issues at all when making changes or updating OTA, you'll want this setting. Note: this is not a static IP, it just tells ESPHome to use an IP address to do all OTA work with a given ESP device. You can of course set a static IP but this isn't that. You'll also notice that the wifi ssid and passwords are variables, you'll also see at the top of the full config are references to "secrets" file. You'll need to create one or update the one in this repo and copy it to the config/esphome main folder... if you have setup other esp devices, changes are you have this already.

   ```
   # Connect to WiFi & create captive portal and web server
   wifi:
      ssid: "${ssid}"
      password: "${wifi_password}"
      use_address: XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX
   ```

Commit message:

Updated README to show external component changes

README.md, after:

## espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor
Home Assistant / ESPHome Integration for the Seeed Studio 60GHz mmWave Breathing and Heartbeat Module

# Now updated as a proper external component as custom components have been deprecated in ESPHome

The change notes from ESPHome:
https://esphome.io/guides/contributing#a-note-about-custom-components

Notable changes are in the yaml layout and the restructuring of the include/header file to be recognized as a proper python application.

![ESPHome HA Integration](/static/images/HA%20Sensor.png)

![ESP Capive Portal](/static/images/ESP%20Captive%20Portal.png)

Some project notes and data on development testing can be found [here](/static/project.md)!

My first attempts to make one of these Seeed 60GHz mmWave radar sensors work in Home Assistant was using MQTT which you can find some examples in my other repos here but the ultimate goal was always to fully enable an ESPHome integration which I've learned is simply more stable on its own, and also more resilient with respect to HA restarts or even power flickers or WiFi issues. The way the HA/ESPHome host taps into the ESP MCU using the API method simply works and you're able to rely on the mature underlying code which is installed onto the MCU when you start out using ESPHome as the base to build your sensors. Using MQTT on Arduino was fun and I learned a lot but this is quite a bit more reliable as a smart home integration with Home Assistant.

# Sensors explained...

Not all the sensors require an introduction, presence, motion, heartrate... all seem pretty self explanatory but there are some caveats on how I chose to implement them in ESPHome and C++

   * Activity Level is a 0-100 scale representation of just how much movement the sensor is detecting, don't kill the messenger, I have no idea how the sensor determines this
   * Angles X, Y, and sometimes Z?... yeah, I don't know how to read these, again-I'm just reporting the data to these states. You can find various notes and documentation hints on the Seeed Wiki and in their forums. The, so called, "upper computer" software also may hint how to read this data. Note: X and Y seem to update, Z is always zero. So really, never Z lol.
   * Distance does seem to work ok, the raw data from the sensor module is in CM so I'm using a multiplier to show it as 1 decimal Meters
   * Heartrate Level seems to work fine; I have not tested its effective range or used any other instrument to judge it's accuracy
   * Heartrate State is a no go. It is in the documented protocol tables and I've asked some Seeed support questions about it but haven't received much of a definitive answer. There is, however, a note in the protocol tables about how "the default is to not... at this time" which I suppose means it's not implemented yet.
   * Motion is an interesting one; I'm using it as a binary sensor, simply there is or is not motion. However, technically there are 3 states for this (none, stationary, and active) and I'm ignoring none because I can't think of why it’s even there given there is a separate dedicated presence function. Therefore, I'm mapping active and stationary to 1, and 0 respectively.
   * Presence is just a perfect binary status byte 1 or 0, present, not present.
   * Respiratory Rate works "as well as" heartrate level, again, I've no way to judge accuracy, I'm just updating the state with the raw data
   * Respiratory State... possibly the most interesting of them all, it starts out as detecting, then could be one of 3 more states: normal, too low, too high. I find this one quite entertaining... and that's probably the only thing you should use it for, entertainment purposes only! lol. I would instead recommend that you just use the actual Resp Rate data and devise your own thresholds that trigger alerts perhaps.  

# Sensor implementation

You can see from the ESP captive portal image above that some of the sensors have "internal" template references that look like duplicates. These will only show up in the code or on the debug webtool for the ESP module. I used the publish to template method to be able to have binary and text sensors using state data received to basic sensors from a single UART device component class.

The presence sensor for example:
  ```
  - id: presence_sensor
    name: "internal_presense_sensor_to_binary_template"
    internal: true
    on_value:
      - binary_sensor.template.publish:
          id: presence_template
          state: !lambda return x > 0;
  ```
Has a corresponding binary_sensor reference:

  ```
  - platform: template
    id: presence_template
    name: "${room} Presence"
    device_class: occupancy
    filters:
      - delayed_off: 5s
  ```

The presence sensor is marked as internal: true and given a name to hint at this while the presence binary_sensor is the one that is presented to the integration and has the occupancy device class and proper states

There are likely other ways to get around the issues I was facing but I found this to be clean and easy enough and kept the include.h uart device component code nice and simple.


# Installation:
 * Download the external component python, header and source files and copy to your ESPHome root folder keeping relative paths the same to avoid needing to change references:
 * Note: if you used a previous version of this repo, you can remove the header/esp-mmwave-60ghz-sensor.h file as it's no longer used

   ```
   your_esphome_root_folder
   ├── espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor.yaml
   └── external_components
       └── mr60bha1
           ├── __init__.py
           ├── mr60bha1_component.h
           └── mr60bha1_component.cpp
   ```
 
 * In Home Assistant add-on, click ESPHome>open web gui and create a new device choosing the "continue" option and give it a name such as:

   ```
   espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor
   
   ```

* Click next and chose the type of ESP module you used in your build, this isn't a critical thing to have match but as long as it's some kind of ESP32 you can just select that for now and click next.
* You'll see a new card appear in the background for your ESP device, this is just an empty shell with only basic initialization code so far... click skip because you don't want to install this basic code to the ESP quite yet.
* Now click edit on your new sensor in ESPHome and you'll see the basic code:
   ```
   esphome:
    name: espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor

   esp32:
    board: esp32dev
    framework:
      type: arduino

   # Enable logging
   logger:

   # Enable Home Assistant API
   api:
     encryption:
       key: "cEEo6Dse5jSfuJ2FznX+3n7A6+6ZmzVNe92axpm2t04="

   ota:
     password: "488d6a3de442afaddb0250cffce64711"

   wifi:
    ssid: !secret wifi_ssid
    password: !secret wifi_password

     # Enable fallback hotspot (captive portal) in case wifi connection fails
    ap:
      ssid: "espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor"
     password: "RvZXGuhrPCzl"

   captive_portal:
   ```

* The easiest way to proceed is to copy all the code above out to notepad++ or your favorite editor and then paste back in the entire code from:
   ```
   esphome.yaml
   ```
* Now just edit some key lines in your new config:

   ```
    substitutions:
      # change device name to match your desired name
      device_name: "espresence-mr60bha1-mmwave-sensor"
      # change sensor name below to the one you want to see in Home Assistant
      device_name_pretty: ESP mmWave 60 gHz Test
      # change room name below to the one you want to see in Home Assistant
      room: ""
      # change the below to be your WiFi SSID
      ssid: !secret wifi_ssid
      # change the below to be your WiFi password
      wifi_password: !secret wifi_password
      # UART TX Pin
      uart_tx_pin: GPIO17
      # UART RX Pin
      uart_rx_pin: GPIO16
      # Distance sensor multiplier to express meters instead of centimeters
      distance_multiplier: ".01"
      
   ```
* The room: "name" is key as it will be the name of each sensor object in HA so if you chose "Office" here, you sensors will be Office Motion, Office Presence, etc...

* You'll also want to copy the generated api encryption key and ota password into this section of the full code:

   ```
   # Enable Home Assistant API
   api:
      encryption:
         key: "assigned_when_you_add_to_esphome"

   ota:
      password: "assigned_when_you_add_to_esphome"
   ```

* Lastly, in the wifi: section, there is a line that says "use_address: XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX" this is an optional element to workaround typical issues with mDNS and wifi/subnets. Basically, if you find your device is always showing as offline in ESPHome or has any issues at all when making changes or updating OTA, you'll want this setting. Note: this is not a static IP, it just tells ESPHome to use an IP address to do all OTA work with a given ESP device. You can of course set a static IP but this isn't that. You'll also notice that the wifi ssid and passwords are variables, you'll also see at the top of the full config are references to "secrets" file. You'll need to create one or update the one in this repo and copy it to the config/esphome main folder... if you have setup other esp devices, changes are you have this already.

   ```
   # Connect to WiFi & create captive portal and web server
   wifi:
      ssid: "${ssid}"
      password: "${wifi_password}"
      use_address: XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX
   ```
